[Music.]
[Silence.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
It was July the 30th, 1945, the USS Indianapolis, the flagship of the Fifth Fleet, had just four days earlier completed the most important and secretive mission of World War II, the delivery to Tinian Island of the most significant elements of the atomic bomb, which seven days later would destroy Hiroshima, forcing Japan surrender and ending the war.
But just past midnight on that late July day,
many lives changed and many more were lost.
When a Japanese I-58 submarine under the order of Lieutenant Commander Michatsura Hashimoto fired six torpedoes from a range of 1,500 meters.
In just 12 minutes, the Indianapolis was sunk with its crew of 1,157 sailors and 39 Marines.
900 made it into the water before the ship went under.
The rest drowned or perished in the explosion.
For four days and five nights, they floated on rafts in the Pacific waters midway between Guam and the Leyte Gulf.
By the time the rescue planes found them, nearly 600 of those 900 had died, some from exposure, most from shark attack.
Just 317 were rescued, 92 of those survive today.
Glenn D. Morgan of Camp Creek was one of the captain's telephone operators and one of the buglers aboard the USS Indianapolis, and we welcome him here today.
Glenn Morgan, it is a pleasure to be with you and to see you.
Let's take it back from July the 30th and talk about the mission itself.
You all had this crate on board, the USS Indianapolis.
It was a crate that obviously caused a lot of consternation.
You didn't know exactly what it was, but you knew it had to do with your mission.
Yes, they took us up to Hunter Point because we were scheduled to go on gunnery practice because of the damage that the suicide plane had done.
But they short-circuited that and put this huge box in back, it's about the size of a van, standard van.
We didn't know what it was.
We knew it was very important.
They loaded it, put it in the port hanger, and there it stayed until we delivered it to Tinian.
But we had no idea what it was, of course, but we knew it was very important.
They put marine guards on it.
and allowed nobody to get close to it.
I walked by it each day and we started a lot of rumors.
It's one thing we like to do aboard ship was start rumors.
So I started one that I thought it was the paperwork and all the maps that they were going to have to have for the invasion of Japan.
That flew pretty good until somebody started the rumor that it was nothing but
scented toilet paper for MacArthur.
But yes, we knew it was important.
Now, the uranium, they put forward in an area I had no idea where that was.
But it was very, very important.
So that's what we did.
We headed out on a high speed run to Tinian.
Right, right.
So your mission was accomplished.
And the delivery of what turned out to be the atomic bomb was made.
But then July the 30th, about 10 minutes after midnight, the day had just started.
Talk a little bit about where you were and what happened at that time.
Well, I stood all my watches on the bridge, and during general quarters, I already manned these JL telephone circuits.
We always had signals come up.
conversations coming in from all over the ship and I was to report them to the captain.
But on that night, I had served my time on watch and I had a housekeeping cleaning area and it was conning tower.
And this was where they would take the bridge and you would go down below into conning tower and they could steer the ship and do everything they could do on the bridge.
And this is where I was sleeping.
and a friend of mine, and we slept on the deck on a mattress cover with a little life belt that you blew up with air, and we were using those for pillows when this terrific explosion occurred.
Let's go ahead and, if we're ready, let's go ahead and take a look at the USS Indianapolis.
We've got a photograph here.
And we'll be able to tell you there's the Indianapolis right there.
And from what I understand from what you've told me, you were situated somewhere right around there.
Right.
Right there at the front.
Yep.
Okay.
But that's the Indianapolis.
That's the cruiser, right?
Right.
It was a heavy cruiser, about 610 feet long.
But it was an old cruiser, but Admiral Spruance.
was always aboard generally.
And it was very high speed.
And that's one thing he liked about it.
And that's what we were doing was about 33 knots across the, well to Pearl Harbor where we fueled up.
The night that this happened, I say I was sleeping on the deck.
My good friend there, we jumped up.
I looked at my watch and it said that 10 minutes after midnight,
So Ralph, my friend, said, why don't we go to the bridge, which we did.
We climbed up a ladder and got on the bridge, and we decided this thing right then was not in very good shape because it was already listing to about 45 degrees.
So we went aft to get a life jacket.
All of our life jackets were strung on a wire behind the chart house.
The chart house sat right in the middle of the bridge.
None there.
Already they were gone.
So by the time we got to the forward part of the bridge, the deck was inclined to about 45 degrees.
Only two other people were there, the bugler, the watch, and the officer of the deck, Lieutenant Orr.
So I asked him, I said, is there anything we're supposed to do?
What happened?
He didn't know for sure.
Thought we got torpedoed.
But they'd already passed the word to abandon ship.
So...
My good friend and I decided to stick together, and I asked the bugler if he was going to sound abandoned ship, and he said, well, as soon as I get the order.
He never got them.
He never sounded abandoned ship.
It wasn't necessary, really, of course.
But I told Lieutenant Orr goodbye, told him I'd see him later, and crawled over the railing because that was the shortest way I knew to get to the water.
My good friend did not follow me.
He thought that was pretty stupid, I guess.
But when I got down to the next deck, I slid down the side and jumped down to the next deck.
Then I slid down the side of the ship until I got into the 40-millimeter gun mounts, and that's where the water swept me up against the gun.
My little life belt sort of buoyed me up a little bit.
The ship began to go down, and the gun barrels by this time were sitting straight up in the air, and I went right up one of those.
Actually, I didn't go up, the gun went down.
But there I was, free of the ship, and I swam away.
And you swam hard, and you found a plane floating in the water.
Looked around and watched the ship sink, and the screws were still turning, and the stern was high in the air.
And then I thought, well, I better see what's happening here.
And when I looked around, I could see way back.
It was light enough that you could see a little bit.
But I could see the silhouette of an airplane.
And it was quite a ways back.
So being the good swimmer that I was, I Australian crawled back to that Venice as fast as I could.
The plane was sinking, but there was a life raft.
And I crawled in that life raft.
There was another life raft.
I tied it together.
And heads popped up and people crawled in the life raft and nobody knew anybody.
You couldn't tell who it was.
We swam through fuel oil and it was all over us.
And finally everything got quiet and the calls for help subsided.
We looked out and there was a little black blurb over there on the water and we
hollered and they hollered back and we found that there were two more life rafts.
They were lobbed on top of each other.
And so consequently we got all four of those together and tied them together and there we had four life rafts strung out and tied together two or three feet apart.
And I looked at my watch
And I know that the thing was very loosey goosey.
In fact, if you picked it up, it'd fall apart.
So I know it stopped at 20 minutes after.
So I was, 20 minutes, 10 minutes had elapsed since I looked at my watch and hit the water, apparently.
So when the ship sank and they say 12 minutes, they were pretty close.
Exactly.
I want to give people an idea when you talk about the life raft, sort of what we're talking about.
Yeah, right.
Because in a recent reunion, you were able to actually see almost an exact replica of that life raft.
And we have a photograph
not the one you were in, but this is pretty much the kind of life raft that you're talking about.
I guess it's made of wood mainly, right, what you were sitting on?
Somebody told me it was balls of wood.
I never really found out.
But you can see that it's covered with a lacing of canvas and painted very heavily.
And you sit down in the water, and that lattice work you're seeing is wood, and it's tied with little lines, little ropes.
that allow you to sit in the water up to your navel just about.
And of course ours had little wooden kegs of drinking water tied in it and there was some food and so forth.
And I expect that's probably what's in those canisters on that.
That's off of a little destroyer.
Right, right.
So you had found two of these and then you found another group and there were two more and you all strapped together in sort of a big rectangle.
life rafts, and there were, what, 19 or 20 of you?
We started with 20, and we had a Lieutenant Freeze that looked like he just had a severe sunburn, but unfortunately, we didn't realize it, but Lieutenant Freeze, he talked.
He never said he was hurt or anything, but sometime during that first night, he passed away.
And the fellas in his raft took his ring and his watch, and there wasn't anything he could do but just slip him over, and we all gave a little prayer to him, and that was the end of Mr. Freeze.
I found it interesting, Glenn, that those who made it into the water who survived that
you were spread out over a 50 square mile area, 10 miles by five miles.
So with the swales and the way the Pacific Ocean was, its own character, for four days, you had no idea that you all on those four rafts, the 20 of you were not the only survivors of the Indianapolis.
That's certainly true.
The next morning, the waves were white capping and you looked around and there was not another soul.
There was no debris, nothing.
And...
I started to go after a piece of, I thought it was pyrotechnics from the other raft, and somebody said, well, you better not look out there.
And that was the first time I'd ever thought of sharks.
And there was this classic picture, you see, of a shark fin going through the water.
And I decided that was not prudent to go after that.
It was just sailing away.
It was blowing away like a sailboat, a canister.
But I didn't go after it and apparently we didn't need it.
So that was the end of my excursion after that thing with the shark out there.
But actually, we made it pretty good.
We were probably one of the best equipped group outside of the captain.
He had four life rafts.
But as the days went on and everybody got aggravated and we couldn't understand why we weren't rescued.
And occasionally we would see an airplane way away.
And finally we decided we better see if we thought we weren't going to get picked up.
And I thought, well, I'll try fishing.
So I tried this little fishing kit.
The Navy did not.
have a very good fishing kit.
It was nothing but a white rag with some hooks stuck in it, some colored yarn, and a piece of bacon rye.
Fish didn't like any of that.
So I quit.
But my good friend over in the other raft, I didn't know the fella, but I looked over and there he was.
We'd rationed the water and everything.
We had spams.
Like three ounces of water a day, right?
Yeah, we had three ounces of water.
I think we had three ounces.
There was some argument on this, but I remember, I think I remember better than anybody.
But we had three ounces in the morning and three ounces in the afternoon.
And we had little cups that had little ounce marks in them.
So they set these up pretty good.
But we didn't ration malt tablets.
And so as I looked over this other raft, here was this guy laying down with his arm up on the edge of the raft, laying in the water, with a dip net in his hand, he'd just pull it apart.
He would sit there like this, and he'd spit these malt tablets in the water.
And in between the rafts, they would come and go, and it was a little calmer in between, and there was a little purple fish that would come up.
And this guy would sit there with this little net, and just about the time that fish would grab that malt tablet,
he would make a pass at it with this little dip net.
And I watched this going on for a while, and finally I said, for crying out loud, I said, you're never going to catch that fish.
And he said, well, what else have I got to do?
And I thought, well, that made sense.
And sure enough, he did catch that fish.
So what turned out to be a good friend a little bit later, took his knife and cut that little purple fish up.
And this guy used that for bait, and he caught the prettiest silver fish about this long, bluish silver.
I don't know what kind they were.
But he cleaned these things, this fella cleaned them with us and then filleted them and laid this nice white meat on the side of the raft.
And most of us took a piece of it just to see, because we didn't really know how long we were gonna be out there.
But now we knew that we could catch fish.
Absolutely incredible.
So you had the three ounces of water twice a day and you had the Spam.
You learned to like Spam.
I didn't mind the Spam.
It was sort of salty.
And later, after rescue, we all wrote a little blurb on what we thought about it.
And that was one of the things that we didn't think they'd ought to be putting salty-tasting Spam in a life raft without too much water.
That's right.
Make you thirstier for it.
The shark issue was, from what I understand, was more of an issue for a lot of the other groups that were around than maybe yours, but you did deal with sharks, especially one that you even named Charlie.
Oh, we did.
We had old Charlie.
I didn't name him, but he was a big shark, and you can't believe how many sharks are in the Pacific Ocean out there in the middle.
There's a lot of fish out there, and you can look down and see these things.
You have to remember a lot of these fellas, and we didn't know this at the time,
were out there all this time, five nights and four days in Kapok life jackets with no water.
And these are the people the sharks really, really took.
The shark we called Charlie,
was a big shark and there were always sharks around us but this one seemed to be one whenever you got rid of your spam cans this shark liked that he took a liking to the grease or what was left in it and you could see that he would get kind of excited when we'd throw those spam cans in and one day I was sitting up on the edge of this raft the corner my little corner back here and not everybody can sit on the edge of the raft to get out of the water because it
sinks further.
It was my turn and I was sitting up on the corner of this thing and I was watching Charlie and old Charlie made a turn and started coming toward the raft and I watched him.
I thought he'd turn but he came on in and by this time I thought it would be prudent if I slipped over away from him and you know Charlie came up out of the water.
His head came up on the back corner of that raft
and momentarily stopped, and then he slid back in.
He didn't try to bite, he didn't try to tear anything up or anything.
But that was my complete dealing with a shark.
You were more fortunate than others.
Oh, much more fortunate.
Yes, especially, and being in the rafts, obviously, because the people that were just in the jackets, they were the favorite target of the sharks, obviously.
Some of the guys would jump over the side in the hot part of the day and get cooled off, and none of the sharks appeared to care to try to attack them or anything.
But I'm sure they'd crawl back in when the one got close.
But I never did.
I thought it'd be better to save my energy and just sit there.
The explosion happened on a Sunday, and you go through Monday, you go through Tuesday, Wednesday.
Faith was waning at this point, I think, and then
And then all of a sudden, someone found you, and it was quite by accident, as the story was told later.
That's really true.
My friend in this other raft, the sun was setting in the evening of the fourth day there, and he said, Morgan, he said, look down south.
Now, we knew where south was if the sun was setting in the west.
There was a little speck on the, and he said, is that a bird or a plane?
And I said, gosh, I believe that's a bird.
And about that time, a little flash of light came off of this speck.
And I said, no, I believe that's a plane.
And when I said plane, all this time, these other guys, everybody was pretty dejected.
And you just sat there and you didn't say much, long periods of time.
And the only humorous part about this was one of the fellows in one of the other rafts said one day, he said, why don't we just break out the paddles and start
paddling instead of just dying out here doing nothing.
And I said, well, where would you want to paddle to?
Which direction would you go?
And he said, well, I don't know.
He said, how far do you think land is?
And I said, well, I said, I believe land's about a mile and a half.
And he said, which way?
And of course, I pointed straight down.
And he didn't think that was funny.
And I thought it was kind of humorous at the time.
Later I found out I was wrong on the depth.
It turned out to be more like four miles deep.
But as far as the spec was concerned on the horizon, it did turn out to be an airplane.
And that night, why, we found that they were searching for us.
And Graham Claytor, one of the commanders of the destroyer escort, Doyle, shined blue searchlights up in the air.
Now, they weren't supposed to do that.
But he told one of his officers, he said, well, why not just shine them on the water?
We can't search for these people in the water and run over them with a ship.
So they turned on the searchlights and at the same time, they turned the searchlights up in the air and we could see those searchlights those many miles away.
And we were so elated because we knew then that we were going to be rescued.
And sure enough,
Well, several airplanes came over and visited us just by simply throwing a marker in the water and waving.
That made us sort of glow warm at the sight of those things.
But it took a while, and it wasn't until about noon that fifth day that we saw an antenna coming over the horizon, and the USS APD ringless stopped and picked us up.
And that was one of, I guess, about five ships that actually participated in the rescue.
Yeah.
The Cecil J. Doyle, I know, was one of the ones, I believe.
But the ringness was the one that picked you up.
Ringness, APD ringness.
And it was then that you found out that it wasn't just 20 of you, but indeed it was 317 of you that had been scattered over this area.
As we got aboard, I heard one of my good friends, Vincent Allard, shouted my name clear down the passageway, and they were taking our clothes off because we were greasy with fuel oil.
And I didn't mention it, but the first day, I'd swallowed this, and so did the other fellas that all swallowed this black fuel oil.
This stuff is probably the molecular structure of just about crude oil.
And it tastes like crude oil, looked like it ought to taste, because it was, really, I didn't really know I'd swallowed it.
But that first morning, I was so sick.
We were sick, all of us, all day.
And we upchucked that fuel oil until some green stuff came up.
And after that came up, I began to feel much better.
In fact, you almost felt, you felt so good.
You felt like maybe you was on a hive of some kind.
But no, the captain was picked up by the ringers ahead of us.
And of course, I knew the captain, not personally, but we stood a lot of time together on the bridge.
And he called for me.
I went around and got all the, and that's the fact, that's the last time I met the captain.
I saw the captain in person.
until our reunion started in 1960, and he came to the first reunion.
Indeed.
The story of Captain McVeigh is a whole other story that we're not going to have time to tell, but it's chronicled in a couple of books, actually four or five books, Abandoned Ship and All the Drowned Sailors are the two that I have read.
You're on the ship, and I want to go to this picture right now.
This is a photo of you and some of your fellow survivors.
describe that picture.
This is you in the foreground.
That's the young Lynn Morgan.
Yeah, that was me.
And the fellow next to me was the first class.
He was the ranking personnel aboard this.
He was a first class radio man.
He's the one that sent the message.
And I said, well, I know you tap out a little signal, but how did you know that signal left the antenna?
And he said, well, Morgan, he said, I'm smart enough to know when the signal's going because I've got a meter that tells me so.
And that sold me on the idea.
So the next guy.
And this is Admiral Spruance.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
The next fellow.
Yeah, that's Admiral Spruance pinning Purple Heart on each one of us.
He hadn't gotten to me yet, but he finally made it.
The guy before him is one of the members that was in my actual life raft.
So this is obviously, this photograph actually is in the book All the Drowned Sailors, as a matter of fact.
Yes.
There you go.
Um, we're going to go to another picture in a moment, but, uh, talk a little bit about what were your injuries?
What, what was the results?
I came off, uh, unscathed.
I damaged my leg jumping from this skin a little bit.
Uh, it was sort of embarrassing.
A lot of the damage came from, you know, I said we had these wooden kegs and we didn't,
after we finished the water in these kegs, they would float inside the rack, they weren't pinned down.
And they would, the waves would work those things up and they'd bounce against your shins, believe it or not, and it would bruise your shins and then the salt water would eat a, I thought I had gangrene setting in it, they turned green.
Actually there was nothing serious about them really.
So I came out of this thing
with only those wounds outside of being sick and not being able to see.
That's another thing you couldn't see with this fuel oil in it.
In fact it took a couple of days before and when you would try to, I'd try to stand up to see over these other waves, see if I could see.
You can't do it.
Standing up was futile and opening your eyes
and the bright sun and everything just killed you.
And you'd sit there and spit in your fingers and wipe your eyes and it didn't seem to help but about on the second day, everything began to get a lot better.
And I tell you, I felt a lot better from then on.
But it never seemed to bother my eyes.
I see fairly well.
Glenn, this summer you'll be remembering the 60th anniversary of this.
You all have had reunions just about every summer in Indianapolis.
Matter of fact, we've got a photograph here of one of your very, very early reunions.
This is aboard the USS Hollandia.
And you can barely remember that.
I think that was taken in the 1960s, I believe.
No, this was actually, Tom, this was actually taken on the way back.
This was the survivors that the Hollandia picked us up on Guam and all those that were able.
There were still some pretty sick fellows.
Right.
But those that were able, they loaded us aboard this aircraft carrier.
And I think you have a picture of that later.
But yeah, we were all ganged up out there and they took this picture.
I didn't remember when they took it.
I never could find myself in that picture, but I'm there.
You are definitely there.
This is a story that would take days and days and days to tell.
Unfortunately, we have a half an hour to tell it, but I do.
refer people to the books, All the Drowned Sailors, Abandoned Ship.
There's two or three other books also.
An incredible story that you continue to tell.
You tell the young groups, you tell the older groups, and it's one that we're very proud to have you here, certainly, Glenn Morgan, and we thank you very much for visiting with us and telling us your story.
Appreciate it.
An incredible story.
Glenn Morgan and 91 others, survivors, survived the largest naval wartime disaster in history.
It has been chronicled in the four books that I have talked to you about.
The script for the movie Jaws, you remember Robert Shaw telling Richard Dreyfuss about the scar that he got from the shark bites after serving on the Indianapolis.
Well, that was Hollywood.
This is real.
Glenn D. Morgan is real and proudly tells his story.
We salute him and be sure to thank a veteran.
For Glenn D. Morgan, I'm Tom Turbiville.
Tune in next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Silence.]
[Music.]